## Human communication

This field is related both to philosophy (works of later Husserl, e.g.
Ideas II, are devoted to the intersubjective realm of ideas developed in
interaction with the world and within the community) and to linguistics
(language is the primary to tool for creation and maintenance of
meanings). Each communication act is both personal (it necessarily
involves at least two persons: the one that provides information, and
the one that consumes it) and intersubjective (it is successful, if both
sides appreciate similarities and differences between them). The notion
of information transmission is significantly reduced without the second
person, which has an access to conveyed information and wants to
understand it. Carefully planned communication should take into account
such an undetermined potential reader and “empathisize” into the way
information can be understood by him/her.

My interests in communication studies focus on practices of social
communities for creation and maintenance of meanings in the
intersubjective space of ideas. In particular, this concerns global
communication technologies, which still do not destroy the human factor:
information placed on the web should be read by a person interested in
it. Global communication technologies alleviate constraints of space:
members of a community should not be necessarily located in the same
place. However, the notion of a community to establish communication
between its members is primary for means through which communication is
achieved. On the other hand, such a mean as Internet changes conditions
in which persons can *access* information and *understand* it. New tools
based in Internet include searching for information using structured
knowledge sources (for example, natural language access to XML-encoded
data) and presenting information (for example, information presentation
tailored to target language of the user and his/her level of expertise).

## My papers on the topic

[**Meaning and context in a Husserl-inspired model**](context.zip) A
draft submitted to the special issue “Context in context”
(<http://www.cpm.mmu.ac.uk/~bruce/cinc/>) The paper draws an opposition
between two paradigms in treatment of lexical meanings. The first
paradigm models lexical meanings by means of definitions of categories
of some sort. According to the second paradigm, lexical meanings are
treated as resources for communication. The paper advocates the second
paradigm and investigates the relationship between lexical items and
context they are used in. A meaning description mechanism proposed in
this paper relates meaning-endowing acts (in the tradition of Husserl
and Jakobson) and the systemic-functional linguistics (Halliday). This
mechanism is discussed in application to tasks of multilingual
generation, in which the lexicogrammar serves as an intermediate layer
for realization of concepts of the domain model in utterances of
different natural languages.

[**The semiotics of "Choose Multiline from the Draw
toolbar"**](TKE99.zip) A paper published at the 5th International
Congress on Terminology and Knowledge Engineering, Innsbruck (Austria),
24-28 August 1999, pp. 594-602: The paper advocates three theses: (a)
the nature of terms is founded in the nature of language as the
intersubjective medium for transmission of the social stock of
knowledge; (b) relations between notions of a problem domain and their
expression in text depend not only on the propositional (ideational)
content of words, but also on the interpersonal and textual functions of
language; (c) these methodological considerations are helpful for
applications in computational linguistics, in particular, in AGILE, our
project for multilingual generation of software manuals.

Look at the [Map of the site](map.html) for the relationship between my
interests. My [complete list of publications](publications.html) is also
available.

## Some useful links
