::: {align="center"}
[![Centre for Translation
Studies](itweb/img/standard_cts_logo.png)](http://www.leeds.ac.uk/cts)\
Centre for Translation Studies
:::

# Serge Sharoff\'s homepage

# Welcome to my home page

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ![image of Serge                  |   -------------------             |
| Sharoff](img/sharoff-20           | ---- ---------------------------- |
| 09-noflash-face.jpg){width="200"} | --------------------------------- |
|                                   |   **e-mail:**             s.      |
|                                   | sharoff![](img/at.gif)leeds.ac.uk |
|                                   |   **tel:**                        |
|                                   |               +44 (0)113 343 7287 |
|                                   |   **fax:**                        |
|                                   |               +44 (0)113 343 3287 |
|                                   |   **room:**                       |
|                                   |         Parkinson Building, 1.15A |
|                                   |   **Google Scholar                |
|                                   | :**     <https://scholar.google.c |
|                                   | o.uk/citations?user=qcnf4QsAAAAJ> |
|                                   |   **Semantic Schola               |
|                                   | r:**   <https://www.semanticschol |
|                                   | ar.org/author/S.-Sharoff/2506104> |
|                                   |   -------------------             |
|                                   | ---- ---------------------------- |
|                                   | --------------------------------- |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## My job

I am Professor of Language Technology and Digital Humanities at [the
Centre for Translation
Studies](http://www.leeds.ac.uk/cts/){target="_blank"} within [the
School of Languages, Cultures and
Societies](http://www.leeds.ac.uk/lcs){target="_blank"}, [University of
Leeds](http://www.leeds.ac.uk){target="_blank"}. My teaching is centred
around computational tools which can assist translation, lexicography
and language learning. On the research front I am involved in several
projects related to corpus collection and annotation, as well as to
technologies for language learning and translation.

## My research interests

My research interests are related to three domains: linguistics,
computer science and cognitive science.

Probably the most interesting bit in my recent research is
semi-automatic acquisition of representative corpora from the web, cf.
the set of available corpora and the procedure described at
[http://corpus.leeds.ac.uk/internet.html](http://corpus.leeds.ac.uk/internet.html){target="_blank"}.
The current set of resources includes multi-million word corpora for
Chinese, English, French, German, Italian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian
and Spanish.

Web corpora can be curated in terms of domains and [genres](webgenres/),
and also via automatic annotation for parts of speech, syntactic
relations or named entities. The resources for developing statistical
models are relatively modest for many languages, so I research methods
for bootstraping them from related languages, for example, from
[Russian](publications/2011-dialog-sharoff-nivre.pdf) to
[Ukrainian](publications/2016-HyTra.pdf).

Another recent development is
[ASSIST](http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/projects/assist/){target="_blank"}, a
joint project with Lancaster University, which is about an automatic
procedure for finding translation equivalent using large comparable
corpora (consisting of texts which are not translations of each other).
See a [series of workshops](https://comparable.limsi.fr/) and a [recent
book](http://www.springer.com/cda/content/document/cda_downloaddocument/9783642201271-c1.pdfSGWID=0-0-45-1442068-p174109864)
on the topic.

My approach in linguistics rests on the assumption that language is the
resource for exchanging meanings. My interests in linguistics stretch
from contrastive semantics (how to study words that are used to mean
things in different ways in different languages) to corpus linguistics
(how to study real uses of words in their contexts) to computational
linguistics (how to dewsign computational models for natural language
understanding and generation). See also the page with my tools for
[corpus collection and
processing](http://corpus.leeds.ac.uk/internet.html).

My interests in [communication studies](communication.html) focus on
social practices of communities of language speakers, which result in
creation and maintenance of meanings in the intersubjective space of
people conducting communication.

The most convenient access to the list of my publications is via [Google
Scholar](https://scholar.google.co.uk/citations?user=qcnf4QsAAAAJ){target="_blank"}.

See my formal [CV](cv-formal.pdf), as well as my [academic
genealogy](lineage.html) (the list through my supervisors can be traced
back to Poisson and Gauss).

## PhD projects

I am happy to consider applications from prospective PhD students in the
area of my expertise. The following general topics are preferable:

**Automatic Text Classification for Translation**

:   Setting up a translation project usually involves assessing the
    amount of time required for translating a text and selecting the
    most suitable translator. Modern approaches in Language Technology
    can do wonders with text processing, but it is not clear how helpful
    they can be in the translation settings. For example, can they help
    to determine the genre of a text, its difficulty or suitability to
    translators? Similar text classification tools can be also used for
    tasks related to learning foreign languages.\
    *Background references:*\
    [Serge Sharoff. Genre Annotation for the Web: text-external and
    text-internal perspectives. *Register Studies*. ,
    2021](http://corpus.leeds.ac.uk/serge/publications/2021-register.pdf){.uri}\
    [Serge Sharoff. Functional text dimensions for the annotation of Web
    corpora. Corpora Journal, 13(1):65--95,
    2018](http://corpus.leeds.ac.uk/serge/publications/2018-ftd.pdf){.uri}\
    [Yu Yuan and Serge Sharoff, Sentence Level Human Translation Quality
    Estimation with Attention-based Neural Networks. In Proc
    International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
    (LREC\'20), Marseilles, May
    2020](http://corpus.leeds.ac.uk/serge/publications/2020-LREC-htqe.pdf){.uri}\

**Language adaptation for improving models of lesser-resourced languages**

:   A translation model needs to be applicable to a large number of
    languages, while the training resources or linguistic models are
    often better developed only for some languages. Language adaptation
    can be designed in a way similar to domain adaptation to improve the
    models of lesser-resourced languages by taking into account the
    resources available for closely related languages, e.g., from French
    to Romanian. This can be applied in a range of training scenarios,
    such as Part-Of-Speech tagging, text classification, translation
    quality prediction, etc.\
    *Background references:*\
    [Serge Sharoff. Finding next of kin: Cross-lingual embedding spaces
    for related languages. Journal of Natural Language Engineering, 25,
    2019](http://corpus.leeds.ac.uk/serge/publications/2019-jnle.pdf){.uri}

    [Miguel Rios and Serge Sharoff. Language adaptation for extending
    post-editing estimates for closely related languages. The Prague
    Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, 106:181-192,
    2016](http://corpus.leeds.ac.uk/serge/publications/2016-pbml.pdf){.uri}\

**Non-parallel resources for translation**

:   Modern Machine Translation is based on \"plagiarising\" large
    amounts of existing translations, which usually come from
    institutions such as the United Nations or the European Parliament.
    This is not enough for many language directions or for specific
    domains, such as biomedicine. What are productive methods to mine
    information about translations from non-parallel texts, such as
    Wikipedia articles on the same topic or news wire streams in
    different languages?\
    *Background references:*\
    [Serge Sharoff. Know thy corpus! Robust methods for digital curation
    of Web corpora. In Proc LREC, Marseilles, May
    2020](http://corpus.leeds.ac.uk/serge/publications/2020-LREC-anatomy.pdf){.uri}\
    [Maria Kunilovskaya and Serge Sharoff. Building functionally similar
    corpus resources for translation studies. In Proc RANLP, Varna,
    September
    2019](http://corpus.leeds.ac.uk/serge/publications/2019-RANLP.pdf){.uri}\
    [Pierre Zweigenbaum, Serge Sharoff, and Reinhard Rapp. A
    multilingual dataset for evaluating parallel sentence extraction
    from comparable corpora. In Proc LREC, Miyazaki, Japan, May
    2018](http://corpus.leeds.ac.uk/serge/publications/2018-lrec-bucc.pdf){.uri}
